The Fable of Dryope.

She said, and for her lost Galanthis sighs;
When the fair Consort of her Son replies;
Since you a Servant's ravish'd Form bemoan,
And kindly sigh for Sorrows not your own,
Let me (if Tears and Grief permit) relate
A nearer Woe, a Sister's stranger Fate.
No Nymph of all Oechalia could compare
For beauteous Form with Dryopè the Fair; 
Her tender Mother's only Hope and Pride,
(My self the Offspring of a second Bride)
This Nymph compress'd by him who rules the Day,
Whom Delphi, and the Delian Isle obey,
Andræmon lov'd; and blest in all those Charms
That pleas'd a God, succeeded to her Arms.
A Lake there was, with shelving Banks around,
Whose verdant Summit fragrant Myrtles crown'd,
Those Shades unknowing of the Fates, she sought,
And to the Naiads fiow'ry Garlands brought;
Her smiling Babe (a pleasing Charge) she prest
Between her Arms, and nourish'd at her Breast.
Not distant far a watry Lotos grows;
The Spring was new, and all the verdant Boughs,
Adorn'd with Blossoms, promis'd Fruits that vye
In glowing Colours with the Tyrean Dye,
Of these she cropt, to please her Infant Son,
And I my self the same rash Act had done,
But, lo! I saw (as near her side I stood)
The violated Blossoms drop with Blood;
Upon the Tree I cast a frightful Look,
The trembling Tree with sudden Horror shook.
Lotis the Nymph (if rural Tales be true)
As from Priapus' lawless Lust she flew,
Forsook her Form; and fixing here became
A flow'ry Plant, which still preserves her Name.
This Change unknown, astonish'd at the sight,
My trembling Sister strove to urge her Flight;
Yet first the Pardon of the Nymphs implor'd,
And those offended Sylvan Pow'rs ador'd:
But when she backward would have fled, she found
Her stiff'ning Feet were rooted to the Ground:
In vain to free her fasten'd Feet she strove,
And as she struggles, only moves above;
She feels th' incroaching Bark around her grow,
By slow Degrees, and cover all below: 
Surpriz'd at this, her trembling Hand she heaves
To rend her Hair; her Hand is fill'd with Leaves;
Where late was Hair, the shooting Leaves are seen
To rise, and shade her with a sudden Green.
The Child Amphisus, to her Bosom prest,
Perceiv'd a colder and a harder Breast,
And found the Springs, that ne'er 'till then deny'd
Their milky Moisture, on a sudden dry'd.
I saw, unhappy, what I now relate,
And stood the helpless Witness of thy Fate;
Embrac'd thy Boughs, the rising Bark delay'd,
There wish'd to grow, and mingle Shade with Shade.
Behold Andræmon, and th' unhappy Sire
Appear, and for their Dryopè enquire;
A springing Tree for Dryopè they find,
And print warm Kisses on the panting Rind;
Prostrate, with Tears their Kindred Plant bedew,
And close embrac'd, as to the Roots they grew.
The Face was all that now remain'd of thee;
No more a Woman, nor yet quite a Tree:
Thy Branches hung with humid Pearls appear,
From ev'ry Leaf distills a trickling Tear;
And strait a Voice, while yet a Voice remains,
Thus thro' the trembling Boughs in Sighs complains.
If to the Wretched any Faith be giv'n,
I swear by all th' unpitying Pow'rs of Heav'n,
No wilful Crime this heavy Vengeance bred,
In mutual Innocence our Lives we led.
If this be false, let these new Greens decay,
Let sounding Axes lop my Limbs away,
And crackling Flames on all my Honours prey.
Now from my branching Arms this Infant bear,
Let some kind Nurse supply a Mother's Care;
Yet to his Mother let him oft be led,
Sport in her Shades, and in her Shades be fed;
Teach him, when first his Infant Voice shall frame
Imperfect words and lisp his Mother's Name,
To hail this Tree, and say with weeping Eyes,
Within this Plant my hapless Parent lies;
And when in Youth he seeks the shady Woods,
Oh! let him fly the chrystal Lakes and Floods,
Nor touch the fatal Flow'rs; but warn'd by me,
Believe a Goddess shrin'd in ev'y Tree.
My Sire my Sister and my Spouse farewel!
If in your Breasts or Love or Pity, dwell,
Protect your Plant, nor let my Branches feel
The browsing Cattle, or the piercing Steel.
Farewel! and since I cannot bend to joyn
My Lips to yours, advance at least to mine.
My Son thy Mother's parting Kiss receive,
While yet thy Mother's parting Kiss to give.
I can no more; the creeping Rind invades
My closing Lips, and hides my Head in Shades:
Remove your Hands; the Bark shall soon suffice,
Without their Aid, to seal these dying Eyes.
She ceas'd at once to speak, and ceas'd to be;
And all the Nymph was lost within the Tree:
Yet latent Life thro' her new Branches reign'd,
And long the Plant a human Heat retain'd.

Translated by Alexander Pope, taken from Wikisource.
https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Page:Ovid%27s_Metamorphoses_(Vol._2)_-_tr_Garth,_Dryden,_et._al._(1727).djvu/65
